Punjab National Bank (PNB) is an Banking and Financial service bank owned by Government of India. its headquarters is in New Delhi, India. The bank was founded in 1894. As of June 2019, the bank has over 115 million customers, 7,036 branches and 8,906 ATMs.

PNB has a banking subsidiary in the UK (PNB International Bank, with seven branches in the UK), as well as branches in Hong Kong, Kowloon, Dubai, and Kabul. It has representative offices in Almaty (Kazakhstan), Dubai (United Arab Emirates), Shanghai (China), Oslo (Norway), and Sydney (Australia). In Bhutan it owns 51% of Druk PNB Bank, which has five branches. In Nepal PNB owns 20% of Everest Bank Limited, which has 50 branches. Lastly, PNB owns 84% of JSC (SB) PNB Bank in Kazakhstan, which has four branches.

Punjab National Bank is a PSU working under Central Government of India regulated by Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and Banking Regulation Act, 1949. Punjab National Bank was registered on 19 May 1894 under the Indian Companies Act, with its office in Anarkali Bazaar, Lahore, in present-day Pakistan. The founding board was drawn from different parts of India professing different faiths and of varying back-ground with, the common objective of creating a truly national bank that would further the economic interest of the country. PNB's founders included several leaders of the Swadeshi movement such as Dyal Singh Majithia and Lala Harkishen Lal, Lala Lalchand, Kali Prosanna Roy, E. C. Jessawala, Prabhu Dayal, Bakshi Jaishi Ram, and Lala Dholan Dass. Lala Lajpat Rai was actively associated with the management of the Bank in its early years. The board first met on 23 May 1894. The bank opened for business on 12 April 1895 in Lahore.

PNB has the distinction of being the first Indian bank to have been started solely with Indian capital that has survived to the present. (The first entirely Indian bank, Oudh Commercial Bank, was established in 1881 in Faizabad, but failed in 1958.)

PNB has had the privilege of maintaining accounts of national leaders such as Mahatma Gandhi, Jawahar Lal Nehru, Lal Bahadur Shastri, Indira Gandhi, as well as the account of the famous Jalianwala Bagh Committee.